Goals and Instructions
The goals for this assignment are:
• Implement a Monte Carlo BER simulation for coherent BPSK in AWGN and compare it
against the analytical curve.
• Build a Simulink + Pluto(+) SDR OOK chain to empirically measure and plot BER vs SNR.
Follow these instructions:
• Collaboration: You can discuss concepts, but write your own solutions and code.
• Tools: We will primarily use MATLAB (and/or Python). Directions use standard MATLAB
functions. Strongly recommended toolboxes: Signal Processing, Communications. (BaseMATLAB fallbacks are acceptable.)
• Hardware: We use PlutoSDR or Pluto+ SDR for this exercise.
• Submission: upload a single PDF with your solutions and MATLAB code to Gradescope
before the deadline. You may use MATLAB’s Publish feature to generate a compiled PDF
and attach it as your single submission. Include your name on the PDF.
Matlab Simulations: BPSK BER Simulation in AWGN
Instructions: You will implement a Monte Carlo BER simulation for coherent BPSK in AWGN,
compare against the analytical BER curve, and then study the modeled effect of oversampling
by scaling the per-sample noise variance as 1/L. A MATLAB template with TODO placeholders
is provided on Piazza. Use rng(123) for reproducibility. You may submit either (a) your .m
content plus a short PDF with the figures and answers in a single pdf, or (b) a single published
MATLAB report. For detailed theory on this exercise, follow the pdf posted on Piazza resources
called “Bit-Error-Rate Simulation Using Matlab".
1. BER vs. SNR for BPSK (match theory).
a) Parameters: Set the number of bits to simulate to num_bits = 1e5, and the SNR grid
to snr_db_vec = 0:10. Initialize the random generator with rng(123). Preallocate
arrays as needed.
b) Symbol generation: Generate i.i.d. bits bits in {0,1} and map to BPSK symbols
{-1,+1} using bpsk_symbs = 2*bits - 1.
c) Noise scaling: For each SNR point in dB, compute the linear ratio ebn0 = 10(snr_db/10)
.
Use the normalization Eb = 1. Compute N0 = Eb/ebn0.
d) Detection and BER: Perform hard decisions with threshold 0 (i.e., xˆ = +1 if y ≥ 0,
else −1). Compute the empirical BER by counting symbol errors.
e) Analytical curve: Compute and plot the theoretical BER Pb = Q
√
2Eb/N0

=
0.5 erfc√
Eb/N0

on the same axes (semilog-y). Label axes, add legend, and ensure
grid is on. This plot is Figure 1.
f) Brief reflection (3–5 sentences): Comment on the similarity between the simulated
and analytical curves, the effect of Monte Carlo variability at low/high SNRs, and any
minor discrepancies you observe.
2. Modeled oversampling study (processing-gain view).
a) Oversampling factors: Let oversamp_fac_vec = [1, 2, 4]. For each L in this set,
scale the per-sample noise variance by 1/L (i.e., use N0_effective = N0 / L before
forming the variance N0_effective/2). No matched filtering; keep the detector and
symbol rate identical to Question 1.
b) BER computation: For each L and each SNR point, generate noise with variance
(N0/L)/2, add to the same bpsk_symbs, hard-detect, and record BER. Preallocate a
matrix of size [numel(oversamp_fac_vec), num_snrs] for efficiency.
c) Plot: Plot three BER curves (one per L) on a new figure (Figure 2), semilog-y, with
legend, labels, title, and grid.
d) Short discussion (bullet points or 3–5 sentences):
• Explain why the BER appears to improve as L increases under this noise-scaling
model.
Hardware Experiment
In this part, we use a PLUTO+ SDR to simulate OOK transmission, which sends a cosine wave
for bit 1, and sends nothing for bit 0 (noise only). We will install the software for the SDR, build
a simulation model in MATLAB Simulink, and run the simulation to plot SNR versus BER.
1. Installation
a) Connect the SDR’s DATA interface to the computer’s USB port. You can leave the
5V-IN port disconnected as long as the USB port supplies power. Make sure the SDR’s
blue LED is on, while its green LED blinks slowly. There should be a USB drive named
PlutoSDR shown in the file explorer.
b) (Only for new PLUTO+ SDR) Download the PLUTO firmware to the PlutoSDR USB
drive (don’t unzip it). Right-click on PlutoSDR in the file explorer to eject it (don’t use
the taskbar to eject). Keep the SDR plugged in, and wait until it reconnects automatically.
c) Open MATLAB (version 2025b highly recommended, other versions may have different
configurations) and go to HOME -> Add-Ons. Install the following Add-Ons with the
default suggested installation settings.
i. Simulink
ii. Signal Processing Toolbox
iii. Communications Toolbox
iv. DSP System Toolbox
v. Communications Toolbox Support Package for Analog Devices ADALM-Pluto Radio
In the ‘set up’ of the Pluto Radio Add-On, MATLAB will also update the firmware.
After ejection, if the SDR does not reconnect automatically, make sure the LEDs are
not blinking fast, then unplug and replug in the SDR to connect.
d) Check the connection of the SDR by the MATLAB command findPlutoRadio. Make
sure it prints out the radio ID and serial number, as shown in Fig. 1.
Figure 1: findPlutoRadio Output.
e) If, in a second-time use on Windows, the PLUTO+ SDR has its LEDs on but does not
appear in the file explorer, try the following steps:
i. Go to Control Panel -> Device Manager -> view -> show hidden devices
ii. Expand Universal Serial But Controllers
iii. Uninstall USB Mass Storage Device
iv. Replug in the SDR
Deliverable: Include a screenshot of the findPlutoRadio output.
2. Simulink Model We simulate OOK with {0, 1} binary symbols (bits), using cosine (real)
modulation. Under OOK, for bit 1, we send a cosine wave with a positive amplitude, while
for bit 0, we send a cosine wave with zero amplitude. In the simulation, we send 1 × 105
symbols (bits) per second, and for both DAC and ADC, we use a sample rate of 1 × 106 Hz,
which means we always take 10 samples per symbol. We use a 1 × 105 Hz sine wave for pulse
shaping (this is also an upconversion). Then, we modulate the shaped pulses onto a carrier
cosine wave with frequency 9.15 × 108 Hz.
For the simulation, we set one frame per second, and we will run the simulation for several
frames. We will let the transmitter send only bit 0s at the beginning, then send only 1s in the
rest of the frames. As a result, the receiver will receive only the noise power at the beginning,
then receive both the signal and noise power.
a) Run the following code to initialize the parameters. Please note that the Simulink model
will share the same workspace as the MATLAB code.
fs = 1e6; % sample rate
sps = 10; % samples per symbol
fc = 915e6; % carrier frequency (inside unlicensed band)
n = 1e5; % number of bits or symbols per frame (1 bit per symbol)
m = 5; % Simulink will run (m+1) frames
G = 65; % input power gain in dB
A = -70; % transmitter attenuation in dB
D = 2; % input delay
b) Open Simulink by the MATLAB command simulink. Create a Blank Model, and save
it as ‘lab2.slx’.
c) In the Simulink window, go to SIMULATION -> Library Browser. You can search the
blocks here, and drag them out to insert into our model.
d) Build the model as shown in Fig. 2. The configuration settings for each block are as
follows. Leave the unmentioned settings as the default. There are blocks from different
toolboxes with identical names but slightly different functionalities. Please choose the
ones as mentioned.
i. Bernoulli Binary Generator (Communications Toolbox - 1)
This block generates bits. Here, we let it only generate 1s.
Probability of zero: 0, Sample time: sps/fs, Sample per frame: n
ii. Variable Integer Delay (Simulink)
We delay the input for D frames, so in the first D frames we will send only 0s.
Delay length: Diagonal D
iii. Repeat (DSP System Toolbox - 2)
Take sps samples per bit.
Repetition count: sps
iv. Sine Wave (DSP System Toolbox - 1)
This block generates a sampled sine wave, which we use for pulse shaping.
Frequency (Hz): n, Sample time: 1/fs, Samples per frame: n*sps
v. Product (Simulink)
Default
vi. Constant (Simulink)
We don’t send anything in the imaginary part.
Constant value: 0
vii. Real-Imag to Complex (Simulink)
The Pluto TX block requires a complex input.
Default
viii. ADALM-Pluto Radio Transmitter
This block is connected to the Pluto+ SDR, which will execute the upconversion and
send the signal.
Center frequency (Hz): fc, Gain (dB): A+G, Baseband sample rate (Hz): fs, Uncheck
output port for underflow
ix. ADALM-Pluto Radio Receiver
This block is connected to the Pluto+ SDR, which will receive the signal and execute
the downconversion.
Center frequency (Hz): fc, Source of gain: Dialog, Baseband sample rate (Hz): fs,
Output data type: double, Samples per frame: n*sps, Uncheck output port for
overflow
x. Complex to Magnitude-Angle (Simulink)
Because there is a channel phase shift, the received signal is no longer entirely in the
real part. The received magnitude should be obtained from both real and imaginary
parts.
Output: Magnitude
xi. Moving Average (DSP System Toolbox - 1)
This block makes each sample equal to the mean of itself and its previous (sps − 1)
samples, which reverses our sine-pulse shaping.
Window length: sps, Overlap length: sps-1
xii. Downsample (DSP System Toolbox - 3)
This block picks one sample for each symbol.
Downsample factor, M: sps
xiii. To Workspace (Simulink)
Output the received magnitudes to the workspace.
Variable name: s_r
e) The Time Scope (DSP System Toolbox - 1) can be used to observe the signal in the
time domain. To verify that the model works, additionally connect the Pluto RX block
output to a Time Scope. Then, go to Simulation -> Stop Time and set the simulation
time to 5. Press Run to start the simulation. Simulink will run for (5 + 1) seconds, which
is exactly 6 frames in our case. The Time Scope window will automatically pop up. It
will update the waveform, frame by frame. At last, you should see something as shown
in Fig. 3. There are some impulses caused by the startup of the SDR at the beginning.
After that, there should be an only-noise period with magnitude close to 0. At last,
Figure 3: Time Scope Window.
there should appear a strong blue wave (real part) and a strong yellow wave (imaginary
part), which are the bit 1 stream we sent. Since the channel phase shift varies, the yellow
wave might be covered by the blue wave (or vice versa), which is acceptable.
f) We need at least one frame that is purely ‘only-noise’, i.e., does not contain any impulses
or signal waves. We also need the last frame to be filled with the signal wave, which
means the signal wave should appear before the last frame. Please satisfy these two
requirements by adjusting the Stop Time in the Simulink window, and the input delay
D in the workspace (run ‘D=...’ in the command window).
g) Once you determine the Stop Time and the input delay, update the values to the initialization code for m and D. In the Time Scope window, go to SCOPE -> Print to Figure,
and save as a JPG file.
Deliverable: Include a screenshot of the Simulink model and a figure print from the Time
Scope window.
3. Plot SNR vs BER
a) Initialize all parameters with the updated m and D values. We can then use code to
run the Simulink model. We first load the model with the code:
md = ’lab2.slx’;
load_system(md);
b) Then, we can run the simulation for (m + 1) frames by:
out = sim(md,‘StopTime’,num2str(n*sps/fs*m));
Here, m specifies m frames, and Simulink will add a frame.
c) Now we need to obtain the array of magnitude per symbol (also per bit) in the onlynoise frame. Suppose the third frame is the only-noise frame, the array of the received
magnitude can be obtained by:
mag_noise=out.s_r.Data{3};
Note that we can obtain noise power PN by taking the mean of the squared magnitudes.
d) Similarly, we can obtain the magnitude per symbol in the last frame (the frame filled
with signal wave) by:
mag_total=out.s_r.Data{end};
In the last frame, the receiver receives both the signal and the noise, so the mean of
squared magnitudes is the sum of signal power and noise power. We can estimate the
signal power PS by subtracting the noise power PN from the total power. Please note
that we set the Bernoulli Binary block to always output 1, so the signal power PS is
twice the empirical signal power.
e) We can calculate the SNR(dB) from PS and PN . Please use the empirical signal power
for the SNR. Because we measure the noise power in a different frame, there exists a
possibility that the measured PN is larger than the total power in the last frame. In this
case, check if the frame of PN is only-noise, if so, just rerun the simulation.
f) We set the decision boundary as half of the mag_total mean. The BER can be calculated as the probability of reconstructing bit 0 from mag_total.
g) Traverse gain G in the range 0:0.5:10, and plot SNR(dB) vs BER. Adjust the transmitter
attenuation A, so the lowest SNR plotted is around −10 dB. Please note:
i. In each iteration, you need to set the value of G, run the simulation, and calculate
SNR and BER.
ii. If you happen to get a negative PS, try to rerun the simulation. If it happens
frequently, set a larger A to increase SNR.
iii. Instead of a line plot, please use a scatter plot, e.g., MATLAB code:
plot(SNR_set,BER_set,’o’)
iv. You should obtain something similar to Fig. 4.
Deliverable: Include the SNR(dB) vs BER plot.
Note: Figures must include titles, labeled axes with units, and legends when relevant.